---
layout: post
title: "Exercising, Self-Acceptance, and Exercising Self-Acceptance"
date: 2023-05-06
categories: jekyll update
image: /assets/images/background.jpg
author: Jennifer Huang
---
Struggling through 10 seemingly-eternal minutes of squat variations—plié squats, sumo squats, narrow squats, wall squats, squats with your toes raised—when your legs feel like they’re on fire is difficult, to say the least. It’s even more so to be enthusiastic about it. Yet, YouTuber and entrepreneur Cassey Ho somehow manages to do just that as an online Pilates instructor: her infectious positivity and encouraging words seep through the screen as she leads viewers through some of the most intense workouts a human body could ever experience. 

It saddened me, then, when I read about her battles with weight and body image throughout her fitness journey in her recent blog post “Too Fat? Too Skinny? I am SO sick of this.” According to the post, it truly seemed like she couldn’t win against public judgment. Because people often associate the effectiveness of a fitness instructor’s workouts with the instructor’s own body, a societal standard develops for fitness instructors to be perfectly muscular; otherwise, the intensity and effectiveness of the actual workout decrease in value, in the viewers’ eyes. When viewers saw that Cassey didn’t match their standards due to her lack of ab lines, for example, they called her “fat” and criticized her workout routine, claiming that her exercises must not be effective. As a result of this backlash, she lost weight—a natural response to the power of societal pressure. 

Multiply Cassey’s voice by millions, and we see the result of social media defining American females’ perception of beauty: 91% of women are dissatisfied with their weight and, in turn, resort to dieting. Because, to them, “beauty” takes the shape of a five-foot-five body with 36-26-36-inch measurements—thin but curvy, well-toned but not overly-muscular.

Hence, the current Body Positivity Movement soon became a wave that took over the internet by storm, promoting the message that everyone should love and accept their bodies despite society telling us otherwise. In other words, “body positivity.”

But Cassey’s struggles highlight a presumed paradox between fitness and body positivity. After Cassey lost weight, commenters now argued in the name of the Body Positivity Movement that she was promoting an unhealthy diet culture because she was “too skinny.” In what seemed to be a motion supporting body positivity, commenters had hypocritically fallen on the other side of bodily obsessions: body-shaming. Since fitness often involves making changes and improvements to one’s body, it clashes with the concept of accepting one’s externally-deemed flaws—or so it seems. In reality, the Body Positivity Movement and fitness are not mutually exclusive at all. 

Fitness, as defined by the Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine, refers to the ability of one’s body systems to work together efficiently to allow one to be healthy and perform activities of daily living. Body positivity, on the other hand, revolves around body image and the rejection of superficial beauty standards; the confusion arises when fitness is mistakenly associated with appearance. Once we elucidate these terms, Cassey’s struggle transforms from a contradiction between to a unification of the two concepts, as they work in tandem to produce positive impacts on physical and mental health. 

Granted, Cassey is not the average American, fitness-wise. She’s a masochist (for legal reasons this is a joke), as she relishes the burn of high-intensity exercises. But for her—and unknowingly, for the “average” person as well—exercise genuinely makes her feel good. Don’t get me wrong. I would sooner dip my toes in a jar of carnivorous pickles than enjoy the wheezy, lung-burning process of running. But after reflecting on my college gym experience, I found that I felt better—physically and mentally—on the days that I exercised. After all, happiness and fitness are inextricably linked, perpetuating each other in a positive feedback loop, according to a 2016 Harvard research study. Exercise releases endorphins, our “happy hormones,” and a happier psychological state is more likely to lead to physical activity.

Nonetheless, exercise still involves changing one’s body, and it’s difficult to tell how much one should change despite remaining body-positive. Even though the ideals of body positivity convey a net positive effect on mental health, it’s still difficult to combat the overwhelming wave of social-media-perpetuated beauty standards. 

But what so many fail to realize is that body positivity doesn’t mean we can never feel dissatisfied with one’s own body.

In her recent 90-day-journey to “to get in the best shape of her life,” Cassey demonstrated exactly why: she focused on her well-being as a whole, which happened to include her body as well. Her journey to self-acceptance wasn’t exhibiting her response to external disapproval. Rather, she simply did not feel satisfied with her then physical state prior to her 90-day-journey; Cassey’s undertaking was a response to her own dissatisfaction. Supporters of the Body Positivity Movement don’t realize that working to improve one’s personal image of oneself doesn’t necessarily indicate that one is not positive towards one’s body. In fact, I would argue that defining and working towards self-made goals is a sign of body positivity; to love one’s body is to accept it, even the fluctuations that come along with it.

With just a tug in the right direction and while working in alliance with fitness, the current Body Positivity Movement has great potential to encourage not just a trend of self-fulfillment, but an internal transformation of our mindsets about our outward appearances. Just like the motivational, empowering way Cassey pushes us through the most exhausting workouts, we must push ourselves to see past the physicalities of others while embracing our own.